Now let us discuss about the time complexity of this
operation
So we have this array and we are searching for
key 70 which is a middle element
Then it can be found in the first comparison itself
So the best case time complexity is order of one
and it will be when the key is a middle
element
Now again we have this array and we are searching
for key 45
So first there are n elements
Then we find the middle element 70 and understood that
the key 45 could be present in the left half
only
So now we will consider only n by two elements
Now we will find the middle element here which is
23 45 could be present in the right half only
So now we will consider only this part which is
n by four elements
That is this algorithm is dividing the array into half
in each iteration that is first
We have n elements then n by two then n
by four then n by eight and so on till
we have just one element that is n by two
raise to 0 n by to raise to 1 n by to
raise to 2 n by to raise to 3 up to one
that is in general n by two raise to key
equal to one so n equal to
Two raise to K now let us take log on both
sides and we will get log two raise to K
to base to equal to log n to base two
and by here is we can write log n raise to
n equal to n into log n
So we will get K into log2base2
the value of log
A base A equal to one so value of
log2base2 is also equal to one
So we will get K into one equal to log n
so the average or worst case time complexity of
binary search is order of log n
now let us have a quick comparison of the
time complexity of linear search and binary search
If we have this array and key 123 we
have to make eight comparisons checking each and every element
in order to find it in linear search and the
worst case time complexity is order of n that is order
of eight here and in binary search the worst case
time complexity is order of log n that is order of
log eight which can be returned two raise to three
And it can be returns three into log2base2
and value of log2base2 equal to
one so three into one equal to three and for
array of eight elements
Linear
search takes eight iterations but binary search takes
only three iterations
So that is how binary search is very efficient than
linear search
But we always need a sorted array in binary search
If the array is sorted then we can undoubtedly go
for binary search
And if we have an unsorted array and to apply
binary search we have to sort it first then
pass it to binary search function so it may not
give that much efficiency.